Both experienced and aspiring traders spend a great deal of time
trying to recognize patterns in the markets – charts and indica-
tors on multiple time frames, seasonal tendencies around specif-
ic times of the month or year, sentiment and flow of funds data.
Clearly, there are many different ways to skin a cat.  By analyz-
ing patterns, a trader is looking for a compelling reason to initi-
ate a trade or to exit an existing one. Markets are monitored for
subtle shifts in the basic supply-and-demand equation, and once
an  “initial  condition”  is  detected  that  indicates  a  spot  where
there is a probable edge, the game simply becomes a matter of
setting up an entry trigger, defining initial risk and then learning
how  to  manage  a  trade  properly  in  response  to  the  market’s
actions.  The trader manages the trade by watching for confir-
mation or non-confirmation.

But why is it that it never seems to play out so simply in real
life?  After all, it is just a numbers game, and it really doesn’t
take long to learn the basic rules.

Perhaps it is because trading normally is ten percent learning
about  the  market  and  90  percent  learning  about  you.
Unfortunately, if a trader doesn’t know himself, the markets are
a very expensive place to find out.  If traders were to spend half
as much time studying their own behavioral patterns as they did
studying the markets, the benefit to the bottom line would be
much  greater  than  having  unlimited  access  to  every  course,
video, system or technical book ever written on the markets.

who are you   ?

Provided by permission of SFO Magazine August/September 2003. © 2003 Wasendorf & Associates, Inc. • 3812 Cedar Heights Drive • Cedar Falls, IA 50613

I usually follow
a trading program

I tend to stay with a
shorter timeframe

I like to trade
in the afternoon

Zoom in on

Personal Trading Behavior

And Profit from It

By Linda Bradford Raschke

Provided by permission of SFO Magazine August/September 2003. © 2003 Wasendorf & Associates, Inc. • 3812 Cedar Heights Drive • Cedar Falls, IA 50613

Bottom  lines  suffer  when  marginal  trades  are  taken,  game
plans  are  not  followed,  and  “unforced  errors”  are  made.
Luckily, traders can learn to recognize those personal behav-
ioral patterns that lead to loss of focus and concentration, in
addition to other bad habits.

No Runs, Some Hits, Unforced Errors?

Let’s  look  at  some  common  patterns  that  lead  to  unforced
errors.  Consider the trader who has been diligently monitor-
ing a market for a particular setup and, for whatever reason,
the initial trade is missed.  He then makes a reactive sponta-
neous trade out of frustration for having missed the first one.
The market has had a good run, and his account is at a new
high. The trader then proudly marvels at the gains he’s made
and  proceeds  to  get  sloppy  and  complacent,  leading  to  an
extended draw down period. He misses an exit spot for a win-
ning trade and lets a winner turn into a loser.  Out of frustra-
tion, he then averages down in the hopes of at least trying to
get back to even.

Many  bad  behaviors  are  the  result  of  emotional  reactions.
However, some are simply the result of bad habits. The goal is
to make trading as automatic as possible and, so, the ultimate
goal should be to create winning habits. As Socrates put it, “We
are what we repeatedly do.   Excellence, then, is a habit.”

Here are some tools that can help traders identify the behav-
ioral patterns that hold them back and, further, how to elimi-
nate  them  or  at  the  very  least get  them  back  under  control.
Equally as important for traders is the ability to identify the
behaviors  that  they  are  doing  right,  because  this  is  the  first
step towards building confidence.

ID the Problem

Always become aware of the particular problem or challenge.
Here  is  a  list  of  questions  to  ask  that  help  identify  areas  at
which to take a closer look.

Is there a time of day where more losing trades are made?  Some
traders do best in the morning, and some do best in the afternoon.

What  types  of  trades  are  leading  to  the  most  consistent
results?    Many  traders  have  their  best  results  staying  on  a
shorter timeframe and not giving big-picture trades the bene-
fit  of  the  doubt.    For  others,  trying  to  engage  in  short-term
scalping can lead to overtrading and frequent whipsaws.

Is there a game plan or trading program that is set in place before
the day begins, and how closely is this plan being followed?

Are extraneous factors outside of the trading environment, such
as personal relationships, finances or illness interfering with a
trader’s judgment or becoming a distraction in general?

Are  occasional  large  one-day  losses  occurring  from  sloppi-
ness  or  dropping  of  the  guard,  and  is  the  trader  more  emo-
tional or reactive on these types of days?

Is general burnout leading to sloppy habits, lack of focus or
reactive overtrading?

These are a few of the reasons that normal, intelligent people
can get caught up in destructive behavioral patterns.  So, is it
possible to break the patterns that lead to the more emotional
market draw downs?  And, how can one take this to the next
level,  know  when  things  are  going  right  and,  thus,  increase
leverage used on the better trades?

The Body Keeps in Touch

It is easy for most people to learn how to recognize how their
body feels when in different states.  An athlete who is in the
groove  may  feel  keenly  aware,  yet  relaxed  overall.    On  the
other hand, an athlete who is “choking” will be tense, anxious
and rushed. Learning to pay attention to bodily reactions can
help a trader confirm when he is engaged in good behavioral
patterns or transgressing his own rules.  He also can learn to
recognize how his body feels when a trade is working out and
how it feels in a losing trade.

Here’s a personal example.  When I know a trade is working
according to plan and the market is doing as expected – even
if the trade has not yet kicked in – I find that I feel a level of
confidence  where  I  do  not  feel  compelled  to  look  at  the
screen.    I  do  not  feel  bothered  by  anything  and  am  relaxed
with a feeling of “knowing” that my position is a good one.
However, if I am in a trade and it does not “feel” right, even
if it has not moved against me, I find myself gazing intently
at the screen, my breathing is a bit more shallow, and I hard-
ly blink.  Five minutes can pass by, and I will still be sitting
in exactly the same position in my chair.

I also am aware of certain patterns in which I engage when I
am starting to get tired or burned out.  I know from experience
that I will be more likely to drop my guard at these points, and
so I will do best if I stop trading when I feel this way.

The longer a trader has been trading, the greater his aware-
ness  that  higher  highs  in  the  equity  can  still  be  foiled  by
lower  lows;  this  is  the  one  thing  to  forever  be  on  guard
against.    Many  winning  sports  teams  have  won  champi-
onships  strictly  by  playing  fabulous  defense.      However,
with trading the ultimate goal is to do more than just eke out
a  living,  but  instead  to  truly  capitalize  on  the  occasional
gifts the market can offer.  So, just as it is important to rec-
ognize how one feels when in a state that can lead to errors
in  judgment,  it  is  equally  important  to  identify  with  a
“Green  Light  GO”  condition.    This  is  when  it  is  time  to
pound  the  table  and  stay  with  a  strong  trend  move.
Confirmation of a winning trade comes not just from indi-

Provided by permission of SFO Magazine August/September 2003. © 2003 Wasendorf & Associates, Inc. • 3812 Cedar Heights Drive • Cedar Falls, IA 50613

cators, but also from our own bodily state, which will give
the feeling of being in sync.

Ultimately, the traders who make it in this business will be the
ones with the most perseverance.  As time goes by, experience
will become a trader’s greatest asset.  Each day, a trader gets
more experience as to what the best trades feel like and which
of his own behavioral patterns lead to trouble.   Once he learns
the patterns that lead to mistakes, it is easier to make those
mistakes with less frequency.  The fewer the unforced errors,
the steadier the equity curve in the long run.

C’mon Baby, Let the Good Times Roll

Sometimes there can be frustrating periods in the market where
it is easy to wonder if the “good times” will ever return again.
Keep in mind that market movements are not steady.   There can
be long, flat periods in a particular market, or periods of erratic
choppiness in both directions. The market seldom moves with
consistent  moderate  swings.     Traders  who  do  not  possess  an
even  disposition  or  temperament  will  have  greater  emotional
swings.  Experienced traders know that there are always one to
two dull times a year, and these are the times that require the
most patience and self-restraint.  If a trader is newer to the busi-
ness, he must be on guard to not force trades or overtrade.

How is it possible to break the patterns that lead to the more emo-
tional account draw downs?    Is it possible to develop self-con-
trol?  These are the areas that every trader will continually have
to wrestle with.  Even many professional traders end up having
transgressions after years and years of very successful careers.  It
takes just one incident where something starts to get away from
them, and they are distracted by outside events such as a divorce,
illness in the family, or a soured business relationship. Outside
distractions can easily break one’s focus and concentration.

Tips to Deal with Personal Challenges

Traders who at times experience emotional challenges or frus-
trations in their trading careers are by no means alone.  These
challenges are part and parcel of the business. Listen to the
body and its body signals – there are always signs the body
will put out when engaging bad habits.

But there are certain steps that can be taken to protect against
each trader’s own personal Achilles heel.

Beware of precisely what the particular problem or challenge
is.  For example, maybe a trader has the tendency to give back
three weeks worth of profits in two days.

Sometimes it’s very helpful to identify the conditions that pre-
cede periods when a trader gets “sloppy.”  Was he feeling elat-
ed after having hit new equity highs?  Or, was he distracted by
events that were occurring outside of trading? A trader has to
learn  to  acknowledge  the  sides  of  his  personality  that  hold

him  back  in  trading,  because  these  traits  are  never  going  to
disappear.  After all, we are not robots – we are human.  But
when he can recognize a pattern of feelings or emotions he
feels before he starts to get into trouble, he is a lot less likely
to take a trade that was not part of his game plan.

Have a trading plan each day.  This is insurance against making
marginal, spontaneous trades.  It also will protect the trader in that
it forces him to take one day at a time and reminds him that the mar-
ket alternates between trending periods and choppy periods.  Atrad-
er that can identify ahead of time the type of period that he is in can
be prepared with the appropriate type of strategy for that day.

Routines and rituals are tools for staying grounded in the pre-
sent and can aid in keeping the trader’s behavior consistent with
his trading plan. Everyone needs tools to create structure and
order in an otherwise very abstract game. Record-keeping such
as logging trades, statistics or market indicators, is an excellent
discipline that helps one stay in the present and stay consistent.

Set small goals every day.  Such a goal might be to have three
winning days in a row, or to follow a trading plan just for that day.
It might be to make no more than three trades a day and to refrain
from overtrading.   Or, it could be to put a half position on every
five-minute  bull  or  bear  flag  that  forms. A trader’s  small  goals
should reflect his own trading style, needs and weaknesses.

A trader  should  learn  to  differentiate  between  challenging
conditions that are caused by the market environment, versus
unforced errors that he makes himself. He should avoid being
hard on himself if the current environment is flat or his nor-
mal trading style is not suited to current conditions.

A good way to correct behavior is to think at all times about a
desired  outcome.    Post  it  next  to  the  trading  screen.    Read  it
every  morning.    Every  time  a  trader  goes  to  take  action,  he
should ask if it truly supports his desired goal. If he wants the
outcome badly enough, he will find away to reach it. He should
imagine  the  winning  feeling  upon  achieving  those  short-term
goals and replay that feeling over and over in the mind as moti-
vation. It’s important to be very clear about what his purpose
and goals are in the market each day, not just over the long run.

Traders  should  consider  having  a  trader  friend  with  whom
they can share their daily account statements.  Most traders
will do better when they have to be accountable to an outside
party with regard to their trading performance; they are less
likely to let one large loser get out of hand.  If his judgments
are impaired, at least there is someone on the other end who
can draw attention to the fact that the trader is deviating from
his plan or might be in need of a break. A trading buddy is not
there to offer advice on the market or on individual trades.   In
fact, if a trader finds himself having to ask for advice or opin-
ions,  it  is  a  sure  sign  that  he  should  not be  in  that  trade. A
buddy is there to serve as a coach – to offer a pep talk or moti-
vational  boost  if  needed,  or  to  serve  as  an  outside  party  to

Provided by permission of SFO Magazine August/September 2003. © 2003 Wasendorf & Associates, Inc. • 3812 Cedar Heights Drive • Cedar Falls, IA 50613

point  out  when  a  trader  is  engaged  in  destructive  trading
behavior that is resulting in an extended draw down.

Markets can change quickly.  The more unbiased a trader is,
the easier it is to change with the environment.   If he starts to
develop a bias that is not warranted by the technicals, but is
instead caused by emotions or poor reasoning, his body signs
and language more often than not will tell him.  Most profes-
sionals  know when  they  are  in  a  bad  trade  and  know when
they are making a mistake.  The more trades a trader makes
and the more experience he gains, the more he will learn to
recognize his own personal signs that indicate he is indeed in
a bad trade, regardless if it has not hit his stop level yet.  Until
a  trader  is  able  to  gain  in  this  knowledge,  it’s  yet  another
excellent reason for always have a resting stop in the market!

Of equal importance, again, he needs to remember how his body
feels when he is in control and has a winning position on.  The
best traders learn to take this one step further and add to a win-
ning position.  GREEN LIGHT GO!   Step on the gas!   This
concept is as crucial as learning to recognize when a trade does
not feel right.

It Comes Down to Knowing What
Lessons Need to Be Learned
A trader who goes through a losing period should ask, “What is
the lesson I have to learn?”   “What do I need to do to change?”

He should never do himself the disservice of looking back at
chart  patterns  with  hindsight  and  saying  “I  should  have  seen
this.”    It  is  not  an  issue  of  what  he  sees  or  doesn’t  see;  it  is
always an issue of how a trader manages the trade once he is in
it.   Trade management is a process of defining an initial risk
level and then trailing a stop from there or placing orders to exit
the position, whether with a profit or a loss.  A trader must rely
on his best judgment at the time a trade is put on and managed.
With experience, he can learn to recognize the behavioral pat-
terns he exhibits when his judgment may not be 100 percent, the
times he is prone to drop his guard and the market demons jump
up and bite him. And then, over time, a trader’s bottom line can
improve as he makes fewer and fewer unforced errors!

SFO

Linda Bradford Raschke has been a full-time, profes-
sional trader since 1981.  She began as a floor trad-
er and later started LBRGroup, a professional money
management firm.  Raschke was recognized in Jack
Schwager’s book, The New Market Wizards, and is
well known for her book, Street Smarts.  Numerous
educational articles are available on her website at
www.lbrgroup.com.

Provided by permission of SFO Magazine August/September 2003. © 2003 Wasendorf & Associates, Inc. • 3812 Cedar Heights Drive • Cedar Falls, IA 50613


